zkEVM - Add order and prove (#561)
0xPolygon/polygon-docs: docs/zkEVM/architecture/proving-system/order-and-prove.md

This is a major KPI when it comes to positive user experience (UX).

_Throughput_ measures the system's capacity of processing transactions. 

It can be computed in transactions per second, gas per second, or batches per second.

Let's analyze and possibly re-engineer the current system to improve these KPIs.

There are three parameters affecting these KPIs: $\mathtt{close\_a\_batch\_time}$, $\mathtt{prove\_a\_batch\_time}$ , and $\mathtt{block\_time}$.

1. $\mathtt{close\_a\_batch\_time}$: The time taken to get sufficient transactions to close a batch or a given timeout for this purpose.
    
    ![Figure: close_a_batch_time](../../../img/zkEVM/od-close_a_batch_time.png)

2. $\mathtt{prove\_a\_batch\_time}$: The time taken to generate a proof for a single batch. The size of the batch can obviously affect this time.
    
    ![Figure: prove_a_batch_time](../../../img/zkEVM/od-prove_a_batch_time.png)

3. $\mathtt{block\_time}$: This is the minimum time taken to execute L1 transactions.
    
    ![Figure: close_a_batch_time](../../../img/zkEVM/od-block_time.png)

Let's explore how this parameters impact the _Delay_ and _Throughput_ of the full system.

> ### Example. (Processing pipeline)

Author: ```suggestion
### Processing pipeline
```

> Consider a scenario of a simplified processing pipeline, like an assembly line in a factory, as depicted in the figure below.

Author: ```suggestion
Consider an example of a simplified processing pipeline, similar to an assembly line in a factory, as illustrated in the figure below.
```

Identify two key performance indicators (KPIs) of interest: lead time (or delay) and production rate (or throughput).

- Lead time refers to how long it takes to produce the first car after starting the line.
    
    The lead time, as indicated in the figure above, is 6 hours.

- Production rate tells us how many cars can be produced per unit of time.
    
    The production rate is 1 car every 6 hours, which is equivalent to $\mathtt{\frac{1}{6}}$ cars per hour.

![Figure](../../../img/zkEVM/od-processing-pipeline-toy.png)

#### Two scaling methods

> The following question arises: How can we improve both these metrics: delay and throughput? 

Author: ```suggestion
The following question arises: How can we improve both delay and throughput metrics?
```

![Figure: serial CPUs vs. faster CPU](../../../img/zkEVM/od-serial-vs-faster-cpus.png)

Initially, before any scaling was applied, the delay was 6 hours and the throughput was $\mathtt{\frac{1}{6}}$​​ cars per hour.

The serial horizontal scaling, (a), does not result in any improvement on the delay and throughput.

But the vertical scaling, (b), results in the delay of 3 hours, while the throughput increases to _1 car every 3 hours_, which is equivalent to $\frac{1}{3}$ _cars per hour_.

## Improving batch processing KPIs

In the current design, batch processing consists of: closing a batch, generating the proof, and submitting the _verify-this-batch_ L1 transaction to the verifier smart contract.

The two zkEVM KPIs can be computed as follows:

- Delay is computed with this formula,

$$
\texttt{delay} = \mathtt{close\_a\_batch\_time} + \mathtt{prove\_a\_batch\_time} + \mathtt{block\_time}\ [\text{seconds}]
$$

- And throughput is given by this formula, 

$$
\texttt{throughput} = \dfrac{1}{\mathtt{prove\_a\_batch\_time}}\ [\text{batches per second}]
$$

> When computing the throughput, we assume that the closing, proving, and verifying a batch can be done in parallel with respect to other batches.

Author: ```suggestion
When computing throughput, we assume that closing, proving, and verifying a batch can be done in parallel with other batches.
```

> And thus, depends on the longest part of the process, which is to prove the batch.

Author: ```suggestion
And thus, in practice, throughput is determined by the longest part of the process, which is to prove the batch.
```

$$
\begin{aligned}
&\mathtt{close\_a\_batch\_time} << \mathtt{prove\_a\_batch\_time} \\
&\mathtt{block\_time} << \mathtt{prove\_a\_batch\_time}
\end{aligned}
$$

> In order to have some numbers:

Author: ```suggestion
To provide specific numbers:
```

$$
\begin{aligned}
&\mathtt{block\_time} = 15\ \text{seconds}\ (\text{average})\\
&\mathtt{prove\_a\_batch\_time} = 120\ \text{seconds}\ (\text{min})\\
&\mathtt{close\_a\_batch\_time} = 10\ \text{seconds}\ (\text{max})\\
\end{aligned}
$$

> ### Improving KPIs with Vertical Scaling

Author: ```suggestion
### Improving KPIs with vertical scaling
```

The aim is to increase throughput and reduce delay.

The one limiting factor in this case is the $\mathtt{prove\_a\_batch\_time}$. 

Vertical scaling means adding more resources to the existing machines.

> It can be done by running provers in more powerful machines, optimizing the proving system, or a combination of both.

Author: ```suggestion
It can be achieved by running provers on more powerful machines, optimizing the proving system, or a combination of both.
```

Although vertical scaling seems like a straightforward solution to speed up proof generation, it has limitations:

- Cost-effectiveness: Upgrading to very powerful machines often results in diminishing returns. The cost increase might not be proportional to the performance gain, especially for high-end hardware.

> - Optimization challenges: Optimizing the proof system itself can be complex and time-consuming.

Author: ```suggestion
- Optimization challenges: Optimizing the prover system itself can be complex and time-consuming.
```

> ### Improving KPIs with Horizontal Scaling

Author: ```suggestion
### Improving KPIs with horizontal scaling
```

Another option is to scale the system horizontally. 

> Horizontal scaling involves adding more processing units (workers) to distribute the workload across multiple machines. 

Author: ```suggestion
Horizontal scaling involves adding more processing units (workers) to distribute the workload across multiple machines and leverage additional hardware resources in parallel. 
```

In the context of a batch processing system, this translates to spinning up multiple provers to work in parallel.

> #### Naïve horizontal scaling

Author: ```suggestion
#### Naive horizontal scaling
```

Consider the figure below, depicting a naive implementation of horizontal scaling, which involves:

> 1. Parallelized proof generation, by spinning up multiple provers.

Author: ```suggestion
1. Parallelized proof generation by spinning up multiple provers.
```

> 2. Proofs reception, where each prover individually sends the proof it generated to the aggregator.

Author: ```suggestion
2. Proof reception, where each prover individually sends the proof it generated to the aggregator.
```

> 3. Proofs Verification, which means the aggregator puts all these proofs into an L1 transaction, and sends it to the smart contract for verification of batches.

Author: ```suggestion
3. Proof Verification, which means the aggregator puts all these proofs into an L1 transaction, and sends it to the smart contract for verification of batches.
```

![Figure: Naive approach - Horizontal scaling](../../../img/zkEVM/od-naive-approach-horizontal.png)

This approach means closing batches serially, while generating their proofs in parallel.

Notice that, as depicted in the figure above, the proofs $\pi_a$, $\pi_b$ and $\pi_c$ are serially input to the L1 smart contract for verification.

This means the overall verification cost is proportional to the number of proofs sent to the aggregator.

> The disadvantage with the naïve approach is the associated costs, seen in terms of the space occupied by each proof, and cumulative verification expenses with every additional proof.

Author: ```suggestion
The disadvantage with the naive approach is the associated costs, seen in terms of the space occupied by each proof, and cumulative verification expenses with every additional proof.
```

#### Proof aggregation in horizontal scaling

Another option is to scale the system horizontally with proof aggregation, as shown in Figure 6. 

Here’s how it works:

1. Parallelized proof generation, by instantiating multiple provers.

> 2. Proofs reception, where each prover individually sends the proof it generated to the aggregator.

Author: ```suggestion
2. Proof reception, where each prover individually sends the proof it generated to the aggregator.
```

3. Proof aggregation, where proofs are aggregated into a single proof.
4. Proof verification here means encapsulating only one proof, the aggregated proof, in an L1 transaction. And hence transmitting it to the smart contract for batch verification.

> The bedrock of this approach lies in the zkEVM's custom cryptographic backend, which specifically supports proof aggregation.

Author: ```suggestion
The foundation of this approach rests on zkEVM's custom cryptographic backend, designed specifically to support proof aggregation.
```

The key advantage is constant verification costs on L1, regardless of the number of proofs being aggregated.

![Figure: Horizontal-scaling proof aggregation](../../../img/zkEVM/od-horizontal-scaling-aggregation.png)

#### Deep dive into horizontal scaling

Let’s delve deeper into how the use of proof aggregation boosts the system’s throughput.

A crucial metric in this process is $\mathtt{aggregation\_time}$, which represents the time it takes to combine proofs from $N$ batches, which is close to 12 seconds.

Throughput, measured in batches per second, can be computed as follows:

$$
\dfrac{N}{ \text{max} \big(\mathtt{prove\_a\_batch\_time},\ N · \mathtt{close\_a\_batch\_time},\ \mathtt{block\_time},\ \mathtt{aggregation\_time}\big)}
$$

Observe that, since proving and closing batches, and aggregating proofs can run in parallel for a set of $N$ batches, verification of all $N$ batches takes as long as the slowest of the three operations. 

Hence the denominator, in the above formula, is the maximum among the values: $\mathtt{prove\_a\_batch\_time}$,  $N · \mathtt{close\_a\_batch\_time}$, $\mathtt{block\_time}$, and  $\mathtt{aggregation\_time}$.

> This means, in the case where the maximum time in the denominator is $\mathtt{prove\_a\_batch\_time}$, the systems throughput increases by a factor of $N$​.

Author: ```suggestion
This means, in the case where the maximum time in the denominator is $\mathtt{prove\_a\_batch\_time}$, the system's throughput increases by a factor of $N$​.
```

Delay in this scenario can be computed as follows:

$$
\texttt{delay} = N·\mathtt{close\_a\_batch\_time} + \mathtt{prove\_a\_batch\_time} + \mathtt{aggregation\_time}+ \mathtt{block\_time}
$$

A straightforward aggregation of batches substantially increases delay relative to a single batch approach.

As discussed earlier, delay is a critical factor to user experience.

> To retain the throughput gains while improving the delay, we can adopt a two-step approach for batch processing: first, _order_ (also known as _sequence_) and then _prove_. 

Author: ```suggestion
To retain the throughput gains while reducing the delay, we can adopt a two-step approach for batch processing: first, _order_ (also known as _sequence_) and then _prove_. 
```

> This segmentation allows for optimization in each step, potentially enhancing the overall delay without compromising the achieved throughput improvements.

Author: ```suggestion
This segmentation allows for optimization in each step, potentially reducing the overall delay while maintaining improvements in throughput.
```

### Enhancing delay by order then prove

> The idea behind decoupling batch ordering (sequencing) from batch proving is to:

Author: ```suggestion
The rationale behind decoupling batch ordering (sequencing) from batch proving is twofold:
```

> - Provide a low delay response to users about their L2 transactions.
> - While being able to aggregate transactions to provide high system throughput.

Author: ```suggestion
- Ensure swift responses to users regarding their L2 transactions with minimal delay.
- Enable transaction aggregation for maximizing system throughput."
```

Sequencing an L2 batch involves deciding which L2 transactions should be part of the next batch. That is, when to create or close the batch, and sent it to L1. 

> As the sequence of batches is written to L1, data availability and immutability provided on L1. 

Author: ```suggestion
As the sequence of batches is written to L1, data availability and immutability are ensured on L1. 
```

Sequenced batches may not be proved immediately, but they are guaranteed to be proved eventually.

This creates a state within the L2 system that reflects the eventual outcome of executing those transactions, even though the proof hasn’t been completed yet. 

> Such a state is called a virtual state because it represents a future state to be consolidated once the proof is processed.

Author: ```suggestion
Such a state is called a *virtual state* because it represents a future state to be consolidated once the proof is processed.
```

> More precisely, the virtual state is the state reached after executing and sequencing batches in L1, before they are proved.

Author: ```suggestion
More precisely, the virtual state is the state reached after executing and sequencing batches in L1, before they are validated using proofs.
```

![Figure: Definition of the Virtual state](../../../img/zkEVM/od-defn-virtual-state.png)

It’s crucial for users to understand that once a transaction is in the virtual state, its processing is guaranteed.

Notable improvement lies in the ability to close batches more rapidly than the block time, providing a more efficient and expedited processing mechanism.

Let’s adopt a revised definition for the delay: 

> - The duration from the moment a user submits an L2 transaction until that transaction reaches a virtual state.

Author: ```suggestion
- The duration from the moment a user submits an L2 transaction until that transaction reaches the virtual state.
```

From the user’s perspective, once the transaction is in the virtual state, it can be regarded as processed.

$$
\mathtt{delay}^{(\mathtt{to\_virtual})} = \mathtt{close\_a\_batch\_time} + \mathtt{block\_time}
$$

The smart contract allows us to sequence multiple batches, in which case the delay can be computed as shown below.

$$
\mathtt{delay}^{(\mathtt{to\_virtual})} = N · \mathtt{close\_a\_batch\_time} + \mathtt{block\_time}
$$

> Observe that we have experienced an improvement in the delay.

Author: ```suggestion
Note that we have experienced a significant reduction in the delay.
```
